oak-doc/src/site/markdown/dev_getting_started.md, before:

<!--
   Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
   contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
   this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
   The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
   (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
   the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
  -->

Getting Started
---------------

Many parts of Oak are still under construction, so it may be a bit difficult to find your way around
the codebase. The [README files](https://github.com/apache/jackrabbit-oak/blob/trunk/README.md), the
[Jackrabbit 3 wiki page](http://wiki.apache.org/jackrabbit/Jackrabbit%203), and the
[Oak mailing list](http://oak.markmail.org/) archives are good places to start learning about Oak.

To get started developing Oak, build the latest sources with Maven 3 and Java 6 (or higher) like
this:

    mvn clean install

To enable all integration tests, including the JCR TCK, use:

    mvn clean install -PintegrationTesting

Before committing changes or submitting a patch, please make sure that the above integration testing
build passes without errors. If you like, you can enable integration tests by default by setting the
`OAK_INTEGRATION_TESTING` environment variable.

MongoDB integration
-------------------

Parts of the Oak build expects a MongoDB instance to be available for testing. By default a MongoDB
instance running on localhost is expected, and the relevant tests are simply skipped if such an
instance is not found. You can also configure the build to use custom MongoDB settings with the
following properties (shown with their default values):

    -Dmongo.host=127.0.0.1
    -Dmongo.port=27017
    -Dmongo.db=MongoMKDB
    -Dmongo.db2=MongoMKDB2

Note that the configured test databases will be *dropped* by the test cases.

Components
----------

The build consists of the following main components:

  - oak-parent        - parent POM
  - oak-doc           - Oak documentation
  - oak-commons       - shared utility code
  - oak-mk-api        - MicroKernel API
  - oak-mk            - default MicroKernel implementation
  - oak-mk-remote     - MicroKernel remoting
  - [oak-core][1]     - Oak repository API and implementation
  - oak-jcr           - JCR binding for the Oak repository
  - oak-sling         - integration with Apache Sling
  - oak-solr-core     - Apache Solr indexing and search
  - oak-solr-embedded - Apache Solr on an embedded Solr instance
  - oak-solr-remote   - Apache Solr on an remote (HTTP) Solr instance
  - oak-http          - HTTP binding for Oak
  - oak-lucene        - Lucene-based query index
  - oak-run           - runnable jar packaging
  - oak-upgrade       - tooling for upgrading Jackrabbit repositories to Oak
  - oak-it            - integration tests
    - oak-it/mk       - integration tests for MicroKernel
    - oak-it/osgi     - integration tests for OSGi

  [1]: https://github.com/apache/jackrabbit-oak/blob/trunk/oak-core/README.md

Commit message:

OAK-301: Document Oak Remove links to Wiki or declare as of historical interest otherwise
git-svn-id: https://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/jackrabbit/oak/trunk@1595932 13f79535-47bb-0310-9956-ffa450edef68

oak-doc/src/site/markdown/dev_getting_started.md, after:

<!--
   Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
   contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
   this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
   The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
   (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
   the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
  -->

Getting Started
---------------

Many parts of Oak are still under construction, so it may be a bit difficult to find your way around
the codebase. The [README files](https://github.com/apache/jackrabbit-oak/blob/trunk/README.md),
this documentation, and the [Oak mailing list](http://oak.markmail.org/) archives are good places
to start learning about Oak.

There is also the [Jackrabbit 3 wiki page](http://wiki.apache.org/jackrabbit/Jackrabbit%203), which
is mostly outdated though and should only be consulted for historical research.

To get started developing Oak, build the latest sources with Maven 3 and Java 6 (or higher) like
this:

    mvn clean install

To enable all integration tests, including the JCR TCK, use:

    mvn clean install -PintegrationTesting

Before committing changes or submitting a patch, please make sure that the above integration testing
build passes without errors. If you like, you can enable integration tests by default by setting the
`OAK_INTEGRATION_TESTING` environment variable.

MongoDB integration
-------------------

Parts of the Oak build expects a MongoDB instance to be available for testing. By default a MongoDB
instance running on localhost is expected, and the relevant tests are simply skipped if such an
instance is not found. You can also configure the build to use custom MongoDB settings with the
following properties (shown with their default values):

    -Dmongo.host=127.0.0.1
    -Dmongo.port=27017
    -Dmongo.db=MongoMKDB
    -Dmongo.db2=MongoMKDB2

Note that the configured test databases will be *dropped* by the test cases.

Components
----------

The build consists of the following main components:

  - oak-parent        - parent POM
  - oak-doc           - Oak documentation
  - oak-commons       - shared utility code
  - oak-mk-api        - MicroKernel API
  - oak-mk            - default MicroKernel implementation
  - oak-mk-remote     - MicroKernel remoting
  - [oak-core][1]     - Oak repository API and implementation
  - oak-jcr           - JCR binding for the Oak repository
  - oak-sling         - integration with Apache Sling
  - oak-solr-core     - Apache Solr indexing and search
  - oak-solr-embedded - Apache Solr on an embedded Solr instance
  - oak-solr-remote   - Apache Solr on an remote (HTTP) Solr instance
  - oak-http          - HTTP binding for Oak
  - oak-lucene        - Lucene-based query index
  - oak-run           - runnable jar packaging
  - oak-upgrade       - tooling for upgrading Jackrabbit repositories to Oak
  - oak-it            - integration tests
    - oak-it/mk       - integration tests for MicroKernel
    - oak-it/osgi     - integration tests for OSGi

  [1]: https://github.com/apache/jackrabbit-oak/blob/trunk/oak-core/README.md
